---
title: "Part II"
tags: [
    "Antitrust",
    "Apple",
    "Case 2:24-cv-04055",
    "Lawsuit"
]
geekdocNav: true
geekdocAnchor: false
weight: 2
---

# Defendant Apple #

19. Apple is a global technology company with headquarters in Cupertino, California. Apple is one of the world's most valuable public companies with a market capitalization over $2.5 trillion. In fiscal year 2023, Apple generated annual net revenues of $383 billion and net income of $97 billion. Apple's net income exceeds any other company in the Fortune 500 and the gross domestic products of more than 100 countries.
20. The iPhone, Apple's signature product, is the primary driver of Apple's growth and profitability, routinely commanding profit margins of more than 30 percent on devices alone-significantly higher than its smartphone competitors. iPhone sales have made up a majority of Apple's annual revenue every year since 2012.
21. Apple increasingly extracts revenue from iPhone users beyond the initial smartphone sale. For example, Apple offers iPhone upgrades, apps and in-app payments, paid digital subscription services (e.g., Apple's music streaming, TV, news, gaming, fitness, and cloud storage subscriptions), accessories (e.g., tracking devices, headphones, chargers, iPhone cases), and more. Apple refers to these offerings as "Services" and "Wearables, Home, and Accessories," respectively. In fiscal year 2023, these offerings accounted for nearly one-third of Apple's total revenue, or four times what Apple earned from selling Mac computers. Some of the largest drivers of revenue within these categories are Apple's smartwatch, the Apple Watch, and Apple's App Store, where iPhone users purchase and download apps. In recent years, Services have accounted for an increasing share of Apple's revenues, while the iPhone has remained the primary gateway through which U.S. consumers access these services.
22. Apple's U.S. market share by revenue is over 70 percent in the performance smartphone market-a more expensive segment of the broader smartphone market where Apple's own executives recognize the company competes-and over 65 percent for all smartphones. These market shares have remained remarkably durable over the last decade.
23. Apple's smartphone market shares understate Apple's dominance and likely growth in key demographics, including among younger American consumers. For example, one-third of all iPhone users in the United States were born after 1996, as compared to just 10 percent for Samsung, Apple's closest smartphone competitor. Surveys show that as many as 88 percent of U.S. teenagers expect to purchase an iPhone for their next smartphone. iPhone users also tend to come from higher income households. Because smartphone users generally use a single smartphone to access related products and services, locking up key user groups allows Apple to capture greater spending on iPhone-related products and services, realize higher margins per user as compared to its smartphone rivals, and exercise greater control over developers and other smartphone ecosystem participants.
24. In fiscal year 2023, Apple spent $30 billion on research and development. By comparison, Apple spent $77 billion on stock buybacks during the same year.
25. Apple was founded in 1976. During its first 25 years, the company focused in large part on producing and marketing personal computers. Although the market for personal computers expanded over the next several decades, Apple struggled to gain customer adoption for its higher-priced products relative to its lower-cost competitors, including IBM and Microsoft. In the late 1990s, Apple significantly restructured the company and embarked on a new strategy focused not just on selling personal computers, but also consumer devices like the iPod, which led to the development of the iPhone.

## A. Apple launched the iPod, iTunes, and the iTunes Store against the backdrop of United States v. Microsoft ##

26. When Apple began developing mobile consumer devices, it did so against the backdrop of *United States v. Microsoft*, which created new opportunities for innovation in areas that would become critical to the success of Apple's consumer devices and the company itself. For example, the iPod did not achieve widespread adoption until Apple developed a cross-platform version of the iPod and iTunes for Microsoft's Windows operating system, at the time the dominant operating system for personal computers. In the absence of the consent decree in *United States v. Microsoft*, it would have been more difficult for Apple to achieve this success and ultimately launch the iPhone.
27. On May 18, 1998, the Justice Department and the attorneys general of 19 states and the District of Columbia filed *United States v. Microsoft*, an antitrust lawsuit against Microsoft alleging that the company had violated Section 2 of the Sherman Act by monopolizing the market for Intel-compatible personal computer operating systems. At trial, the government successfully established that Microsoft took steps to undermine the competitive threats posed by "middleware," such as web browsers like Netscape, after recognizing that if users could use middleware to access a variety of content and services via remote servers, over the internet, they might be less reliant on Windows.
28. Microsoft also took steps to undermine cross-platform technologies like QuickTime, a software architecture developed by Apple to play multimedia content (e.g., music and videos) on Apple's Mac computers and Microsoft's Windows PCs. In particular, Apple's then-Senior Vice President of Software Engineering testified that Microsoft "[wrote] steps into its operating system to ensure that a QuickTime file will not operate reliably on Windows," "trick[ed] the user into believing that QuickTime technology is part of the problem actually caused by the Windows operating system," and "introduced greater technical incompatibilities between QuickTime and Microsoft products."
29. In April 2000, the trial court ultimately found that Microsoft's conduct violated Section 2 of the Sherman Act. An appeals court upheld the district court's findings of liability regarding middleware.
30. In January 2001, Apple introduced iTunes, software built on Apple's QuickTime architecture, and advertised it as "Jukebox Software" for organizing and listening to music. The initial version of iTunes was only compatible with Apple's Mac computers.
31. Later that same year, Apple debuted the iPod, a portable digital audio player that worked alongside iTunes to "let[] you put your entire music collection in your pocket and listen to it wherever you go." Like iTunes, the initial iPod was only compatible with Mac computers.
32. On November 1, 2002, the trial court accepted a proposed consent decree in *United States v. Microsoft*. Among other things, the consent decree prohibited Microsoft from retaliating against companies for developing or distributing products such as browsers and media players. The consent decree also required Microsoft to make various APIs available to third-party developers, including Apple.
33. Following that consent decree in October 2003, Apple launched a cross-platform version of iTunes that was compatible with the Windows operating system. As a result, a much larger group of users could finally use the iPod and iTunes, including the iTunes Store. The iTunes Store allowed users to buy and download music and play it on their iTunes computer application or on the iPod. Apple benefited substantially from this new customer base. In the first two years after launching the iPod, Apple sold a few hundred thousand devices. The year after launching a Windows-compatible version of iTunes and gaining access to millions more customers, Apple sold millions of devices. Apple went on to sell hundreds of millions of iPod devices over the next two decades. Moreover, iTunes became the market leader in online music services. At an event in 2007, Apple's then-CEO said of the iPod, "it didn't just change the way we all listened to music, it changed the entire music industry." At the same event, he announced that the company would change its name from Apple Computer, Inc. to Apple, Inc. in light of its shifting focus to consumer electronics rather than computers.
34. The ubiquity of iPod and iTunes on Windows, in part because of a successful antitrust enforcement action against Microsoft, contributed to the development and success of Apple's next flagship product-the iPhone. But after launching the iPhone, Apple began stifling the development of cross-platform technologies on the iPhone, just as Microsoft tried to stifle cross-platform technologies on Windows.
35. In January 2007, Apple debuted the first-generation iPhone, describing the device as "an iPod, a phone, and an internet communicator," and touting the fact that users could "sync[] content from a user's iTunes library on their PC or Mac." Apple marketed the iPhone as a smartphone that was easy to use. Reflecting on the company's learning from the iPod, Apple's then-CEO announced, "iTunes is going to sync all your media to your iPhone-but also a ton of data. Contacts, calendars, photos, notes, bookmarks, email accounts."
36. The original iPhone cost approximately $299-approximately $450 in 2024 dollars adjusted for inflation-with a two-year contract with a phone carrier.
37. At launch, nearly all native apps for the iPhone were created by Apple. There were only about a dozen apps overall, including Calendar, Camera, Clock, Contacts, iPod, Messages, Notes, Phone, Photos, Safari, Stocks, Voice Memos, and Weather.
38. Within a year of launching the iPhone, Apple invited third-party developers to create native apps for the iPhone. Apple released its first software development kit-essentially the digital tools for building native apps on Apple's operating system (iOS)-to encourage and enable third-party developers to create native apps for the iPhone. Apple also offered developers ways to earn money by selling apps and later in-app purchases and subscriptions. By 2009, Apple was running marketing campaigns highlighting the value that third-party apps provide to iPhone users with the trademarked slogan: "There's an app for that."
39. Apple's decision to invite third-party participation on its iPhone platform benefited Apple, too. The proliferation of third-party apps generated billions of dollars in profits for Apple and an iPhone user base of more than 250 million devices in the United States. Apple's market shares-over 70 percent of the performance smartphone market and over 65 percent of the broader smartphone market-likely understate its monopoly power today.
40. While Apple profits from third-party developers that increase the iPhone's value to users, Apple executives understand that third-party products and services can, in their own words, be "fundamentally disruptive" to its smartphone monopoly, decreasing users' dependence on Apple and the iPhone and increasing competitive pressure on Apple. Apple therefore willingly sacrifices the short-term benefits it would gain from improved products and services developed by third parties when necessary to maintain its monopoly.

## B. Apple invited third-party investment on the iPhone and then imposed tight controls on app creation and app distribution ##

41. Apple controls how developers distribute and create apps for iPhone users. For example, developers can only distribute native iPhone apps through Apple's App Store, which is the only way for users to download native iOS apps. Limiting distribution to the Apple App Store enables Apple to exert monopoly power over developers by imposing contractual restrictions and rules that limit the behavior of non-Apple apps and services. Specifically, Apple sets the conditions for apps it allows on the Apple App Store through its App Store Review Guidelines. Under these guidelines, Apple has sole discretion to review and approve all apps and app updates. Apple selectively exercises that discretion to its own benefit, deviating from or changing its guidelines when it suits Apple's interests and allowing Apple executives to control app reviews and decide whether to approve individual apps or updates. Apple often enforces its App Store rules arbitrarily. And it frequently uses App Store rules and restrictions to penalize and restrict developers that take advantage of technologies that threaten to disrupt, disintermediate, compete with, or erode Apple's monopoly power.
42. Apple also controls app creation by deciding which APIs are available to developers when they make third-party apps. For example, developers cannot provide native apps on the iPhone unless they enter into Apple's non-negotiable Developer Program License Agreement (DPLA). That agreement requires developers to use public APIs only "in the manner prescribed by Apple." It also prohibits third-party apps from using APIs that Apple designates as "private." Apple selectively designates APIs as public or private to benefit Apple, limiting the functionality developers can offer to iPhone users even when the same functionality is available in Apple's own apps, or even select third-party apps. Similar to Apple's App Store restrictions, Apple uses its DPLA to impose restrictions that penalize and restrict developers that take advantage of technologies that threaten to disrupt, disintermediate, compete with, or erode Apple's monopoly power.
43. Developers cannot avoid Apple's control of app distribution and app creation by making web apps-apps created using standard programming languages for web-based content and available over the internet-as an alternative to native apps. Many iPhone users do not look for or know how to find web apps, causing web apps to constitute only a small fraction of app usage. Apple recognizes that web apps are not a good alternative to native apps for developers. As one Apple executive acknowledged, "[d]evelopers can't make much money on the web." Regardless, Apple can still control the functionality of web apps because Apple requires all web browsers on the iPhone to use WebKit, Apple's browser engine-the key software components that third-party browsers use to display web content.
44. Nor can developers rely on alternative app stores even though this would benefit developers and users. For example, developers cannot offer iPhone users an app store that only offers apps curated for use by children, which would provide opportunities to improve privacy, security, and child safety. By contrast, Apple allows certain enterprise and public sector customers to offer versions of app stores with more curated apps to better protect privacy and security.
45. Apple's control over both app distribution and app creation gives Apple tremendous power. For example, Apple designates as "private" the APIs needed to send Short Message Service, or SMS, text messages, which is a protocol used by mobile carriers since the early 1990s to allow users to send basic text messages to other mobile phone numbers using their own mobile phone numbers. Developers have no technical means to access these private APIs, but even if they did, doing so would breach their developer agreement with Apple, and therefore put the developer at risk of losing the ability to distribute apps through the App Store. For example, Apple prohibits third-party iPhone apps from sending or receiving SMS text messages even though this functionality is available through Apple Messages. Likewise, Apple can control the functionality of third-party apps and accessories through its control of app distribution because if an app includes functionality that Apple does not like, Apple can and does exercise its discretion to simply block the app from the App Store.
46. Apple's dominance is such that neither app developers nor iPhone users can benefit from lower cost or higher quality means of distributing apps or purchasing and providing digital products and services. Instead, Apple guarantees that it continues to benefit from the contributions of third-party developers and other platform participants while also protecting itself from the competitive threats and pressure those participants pose to Apple's smartphone monopoly.
47. This complaint focuses on Apple's use of its dominance to impose contracts and rules that restrict the behavior and design decisions of companies other than Apple.
